#summary Error messages of the pBlazASM suite of Picoblaze tools.

=pBlazASM=

==assemby parsing errors==

===? unexpected tokens==
Characters which make no sense are found in the source line.

===? doubly defined===
A constant or label is already defined earlier in the source.

===? undefined===
A constant is used that is not previously defined.

===? phasing error===
An address mismatch occured between various phases (passes) of the assembler.
This can occur when .ORG is used with non-constant values.

===? missing symbol===
A symbol is expected, for instance in the operand fields.

===? syntax error===
The source line is not following the basic syntax rules:
{{{
[<label:] <opcode> <operand>[, <operand>] [; comment]
}}}

===? syntax error in expression===
Malformed expression encountered, like:
{{{
value  .EQU  1!9
}}}

===? syntax error in value===
A value is expected, not a label or a register name.

===? value out of range===
The specified value or result of an expression does not fit in the instruction field available; values over 0xFF can be used as byte constants. An INST can not be larger than 0x3FFFF.

===? syntax error in operator===

===? syntax error, register expected==
A register is expected, not a constant or label.

===? comma expected===
A comma is expected between operands.

===? unexpected characters===
Unexpected charaters are encoutered; example: a hexadecimal value can not contain a 'G' through 'Z', etc.

===? expression expected===
An operand expression is expected, or an expression is terminated unexpectedly.

===? out of code space===
The program is longer than the .END statement apecified.

===? wrong scratchpad size===
The allowed sctatchpad sizes are: 64 128 or 256 bytes.

===? out of scratchpad range===
More bytes are used in the sctachpad, by using .BYT, .TX. BUF etc. than availabe as specified by .SCR.

===? not-implemented===
Some opcodes are not supported anymore or not in the chosen mode.
Typically not all KCPSM or pBlazIDE opcodes or directives are supported.

===? internal error===
pBlazASM encountered some internal error. Please report occurences to pblazasm@mediatronix.com.


== file I/O errors ==

===? unable to open source file===
Could not open the specified source file, maybe it is in an other directory.

===? unable to create LST file===
The specified LST file can not be created or written to. Maybe the file is open is an other program.

===? unable to re-open source file===
Unlikely. Could occur is during execution of pBlazASM the source file is deleted.

===? unable to create data MEM file===
The specified data MEM file (.SCR) can not be created or written to. Maybe the file is open is an other program.

===? unable to create code MEM file===
The specified code MEM file (.MEM) can not be created or written to. Maybe the file is open is an other program.

===? data and code overlap at:===
When scratchpad contents is to be merged with the code, an overlap has occured. Usually this is because of a wrong specification of .SCR.

----
=pBlazMRG=

==file I/O errors==

===? Unable to open template file===
Could not open the specified template file, maybe it is in an other directory.

===? Unable to open output file===
The specified file can not be created or written to. Maybe the file is open is an other program.

===? Maximum of code files reached===
A maximum of 16 code or data files can be merged into one template.

===? Bad address in code MEM file===
An address out of range is specified in the code MEM (.MEM) file.

===? Bad address in data MEM file===
An address out of range is specified in the data MEM (.SCR) file.

===? Missing address in code MEM file===
No starting address is given in the code MEM (.MEM) file.

===? Missing address in data MEM file===
No starting address is given in the data MEM (.SCR) file.

===? missing template file===
No template file was specified in the command line. There is no default value.

===? missing option===
An option value was required.

===? unknown option===
The specified option flag is not recognized as a valid option for pBlazMRG.